We're covering course
8 of the file system.
We are now in Module 3.
In this module, we'll be
talking about the root directory.
The root directory is
the highest directory level
of the volume structure.
It contains a listing
of the files in
directories located in
the root of the volume.
It is structured in a series of
32 byte directory entries,
so two lines of 16.
Each directory entry
is 32 bytes in length,
may contains information about
the files and folders
on the volume.
The file system will read from
the top of the directory down,
and it stops when it
finds a directory entry
beginning with hexadecimal 00.
This is a look at what
the root directory looks
like when we do it
with our tools.
We can see we have entries at
the top and then we have
an entry starting with 00.
Now, the system will
stop reading here.
Your file system will stop
when it comes to these 00s.
But be aware, it is possible
for data to be written
in using a hex editor and
another tool beyond those 00s,
and this data would be
hidden from the file system.
There are three types of
root directory entries.
We can see a volume name
entry and this would be
a user created name
for the volume.
This would always be the top
entry in the root directory.
We also have what we call
short filenames entry.
Every file and directory will
have one of these short
filename entries.
What short filename means is
it means that the name of
the file conforms with that
8.3 naming convention,
which means it has up to
eight uppercase characters,
a dot, and then a
three-character file extension.
If a file does not
conform to this,
it will also have what we
call long filename entries.
There'll be a short
filename alias,
which will be six characters
of the file name,
followed by a tilde, and
then a three-character extension.
But the full filename will be
in the long filename entries,
and these will be located
above the short filename.
This is a look at a
volume directory entry.
Remember, we said we had
three types and this is the
look at a volume name entry.
This would be the top entry in
the directory if there was
a user-created volume name.
We can see it begins
with the filename,
which in our case is FAT 32.
It also contains attributes
such as read-only in system
volume or directory.
It has also a modified
date and time.
Because it is a volume
directory entry,
it will only have
that one timestamp.
When we look at a file entry,
you will see three timestamps.
The short filename entry,
just to reiterate,
is eight uppercase characters
and a three-character
file extension,
and it is referred to as
8.3 or DOS-compliant.
The long filename
happens when we mix
cases where we have a filename
that is longer than
eight characters or
an extension longer
than three characters.
This is what causes those long
filename entries to be created.
Here's a look at a
directory entry set.
Down here at the bottom,
we can see our short
filename entry.
Every file and directory will
have one of these entries.
We see the DOS alias,
that six character,
all uppercase, a tilde,
and then an extension.
We also see above the
long filename entries.
We're going to talk
about how we read
these long filename entries
as we go through this course.
But this is what a directory
entry set would look like.
The short filename
entry, in this case,
we have our filename,
SHORT.TXT, and it was named.
You can see this is not an alias,
there's no tilde D if you
look over in the ASCII.
This is the name of the
file and it would have
no long filename
entries above it.
It's all capital letters,
up to eight characters,
and then it has that
three-character TXT extension.
You can see in here, we have
the attributes and the attributes
would be located at Offset
0B for a length of one byte.
That's what we call
a packed byte.
We break that out to binary,
to see which flags were set.
In other words, which
bits were turned on,
and that would tell us which
attributes this file had.
In our case, it just has
the archive bit set.
Then we see at Offset 0D,
the final time
millisecond refinement.
This is just a millisecond
timestamp that we're going to
add to our created
date and timestamp.
It only refers to
the created date.
Below that, and at Offset 0E,
we see our created date and time.
In this case, it's 6/25/2020 at
1:13 PM and that is going to
be a length of four bytes.
These two bytes at 0E
and 0F of the time,
and at 01 and 02
would be our date.
We have a last access date.
Last Access just has a date.
You can see that it's 02 and
03 highlighted here in green.
This is our last access date.
There's no time with that.
Next to that we have what we call
our first cluster high word.
In this case it's 00.
The high word is
only used if we need
more than two bytes to
address the cluster.
In this case, we did not.
Next, we have our
modified date and time.
Again, the first two
bytes are 06 and 07,
and these are the time.
Then the next two bytes
would be the date.
You can see those located
at offset 108 and 109.
Next we have our first
cluster little word.
Now, since we did not
have a high word,
this two byte value
represents the starting
cluster of this file.
Then the last four bytes of
the entry are the
file size in bytes.
These are the possible
values we can
have for that attribute byte.
Remember, it's a one-byte value,
and it's a packed byte.
It gets broken out into binary,
and we can see
which flags are up.
It is possible to have
more than one attribute.
You could have a
read-only system file.
In which case should
have a hex value of 05.
When you broke that out,
you would see that those
two bits were set.
The reserve byte off at 0C,
is what we call a case indicator.
Reserve byte, if it
is hexadecimal 1,0,
that means this is
a short final day.
It is 8.3 compliant file name.
If at the reserve byte we
saw, a hexadecimal 00,
that would indicate you're
looking at a long file name
and it was not an 8.3
compliant filename.
That's when we can identify
a short filename from
a long filename.
File time.
FAT, 32 file time in
all FAT file times are
going to be in local time,
whatever time the
machine is set to.
They're not recorded in
Universal Time, UTC.
Here we see at offset 0E
and F are creation time.
Down at offset 1,0 and 1,1,
we see our creation date.
They are read together
as a 32 bit value.
This is how the value
would be converted
into a date and time.
Because if you just converted
this two-byte value,
you're going to get a number,
not a date time.
But what happens is,
your file system is
first going to convert
those two bytes for time,
until little-endian.
We saw in the previous
slide, it was AB69.
Now this is converted
to little-endian,
so we have 69AB.
These bytes are separated.
Then each nibble is separated.
The six and the nine,
and the A and the B.
Then each nibble is individually
translated from hex
to a binary value.
Remember, we converted from
hex to binary and decimal to
binary back in one of
our previous courses at the
beginning of this path.
Once we get each binary value,
we can then translate
the date and time.
We are allowed five
bits for the seconds.
We take the bits and
you can see here at
the far right of the
screen outlined in yellow,
these would be our
bits per seconds.
We would fill them in
to the column values,
and since we have five,
we have column values from 1-16,
1, 2, 4, 8, 16.
Each column value increasing
by a power of two.
We can see in our example,
we have 11 seconds.
We must multiply this by two,
because we don't have enough bits
here to account for 60 seconds.
When we multiply 11
by 2, we get 22.
Now we're going to
move to minutes.
We have more bytes to
work within minutes.
We're allowed six bytes.
So we have column values from
1-32 and you can see them in
the slide outlined in green.
We take our binary values
that we converted from
A and drop those down
into the column values.
We can see we have 13 minutes.
Then we would move on to hours.
You can see hours at
the left-hand side
here, outlined in red.
We would have, again,
five bytes toward the hour.
We have column values from 1-16.
We drop down our binary
conversion of our decimal number
six into the columns and we
can see we end up with 13.
Our time would be 13:13:22 PM.
We could go back and add in
our creation time
millisecond value.
The FAT creation
date is translated
in much the same way as
the FAT creation time.
It is a little endian value,
so we would have
to translate that.
Original value was D950.
We converge it here to little
endian and we have 50D9.
Again, we break the bytes apart,
50 and D9, and then
we split the nibbles,
the 5, the 0,
the D, and the 9.
We convert each nibble
into its binary value.
When we're translating this,
we have five bits for the day.
We have column values
one through 16.
Our nibble was nine,
so we would drop down our
column value nibbles into
the correct column
values for nine.
But we also have one of
the D column values since
we're using five bytes.
For months, we have
four bits to work with,
and they are outlined in green.
We take the next four bits
of our value and drop them
down into the proper
column values.
Our year is outlined in red.
We take the remaining
bytes that we
have and we would
drop them down into their
proper column values.
We have seven bits for the year.
We come up with a
number of decimal 40.
Now, the FAT file system uses
an absolute date of
January 1st, 1980.
So we would have
to add 1980 to 40,
and we come up with 2020.
For the months, we
come up with six,
which would be the
sixth month and for
the date we come up with 25.
That makes our creation
date 25, June 2020.
That brings us to our
last access date.
This is translated the same
way we do for the creation date.
Last accessed only has
a date, not a time.
You can see in the slide,
you have D9 50.
You must convert that
to little-endian,
50 D9 and that gives us a date
of the 25th of June, 2020.
We just converted that
in the previous slide.
Now we're going to talk
about the FAT high word.
The FAT high word values start at
65,536 and they continue up,
a power of two for
each column value.
If you had a high word,
you'd be reading it as
a string of four bytes.
So it'd be a 32-bit value
it'd be four bytes long.
We would have to
account for 32 bits.
We'd start with one, with two,
doubling all the
way as we go out,
to get to 32 bits.
We need place values for 32 bits.
Then we would split
our bytes to the low
and the high word.
We'd first convert the low word.
To convert from hex to binary,
we're going to convert
each nibble at a time.
When we convert nibbles,
remember back in the path
when we went over that,
we used the values one through
eight for each nibble.
Because a nibble
only has four bits.
Four bits would be 1, 2, 4, 8.
Those would be our 4-bit values.
We look at the one. We
would start with eight.
Eight can't go into one,
four does not go into one,
two does not go into one,
one goes into one.
We put a one.
We'd have a one in
the ones column,
a zero in the two,
a zero in the four, and
a zero in the eight.
Then we would move to the
seven. We do the same thing.
We'd have column values of 1,
2, 4, and 8.
Because we're converting a nibble
which is four bits long.
Eight won't go into
seven so we put a zero
in the eights column.
Four will go into seven,
so we put a one, and
we subtract 4 from 7,
which would give us
a remainder of 3.
Two will go into three one time,
and one will go
into one one time.
That is how we would
convert the byte.
We would do the
same thing for 2E.
We would convert the E,
which in hexadecimal E is 14.
We would start with our eights.
Eight will go into 14 one time,
so we would put a
one in the eight.
That will give us a
remainder of six.
Four will go into six one time.
It will give us a
remainder of two.
Two will go into two once.
We put a one in that column
and then we would have zero.
Zero will not go into
one so we would put
a zero in the ones column.
Then we continue with two.
We'd start with eight,
eight will not go into
two so we'd put a zero.
Four will not go into
two. We'd put a zero.
Two will go into
two so we would put
a one and that would give
us a remainder of zero.
One will not go into
zero so we would put a
zero in the ones column.
That would bring us
to our high word.
Our high word value when
we split the byte is nine.
Then we have all zeros for
the rest of our value.
We'd start with the nine.
Eight will go into nine once.
A remainder of one.
Four will not go into
one, so we put a zero.
Two will not go into one so
we put a zero in that column.
One will go into one,
we put a one in that column.
Now the rest of our
values is zero,
so would just put zeros
in the remainder of
the columns to fill
in the 32 bits.
Now we go back and add
the actual column
values for our bits.
We would start with 524,288.
That's where we have our
1, so we have that number.
We'd write that down,
we'd go to the next column
there where we have a 1,
and that would be column 65,536.
We would write that number down.
Our next column
value, we have a 1,
we have 8,192, we'd
write that number down.
The next number
where we have a 1 in
our column value is 2,048,
I'm going to write that down.
The next column
where we have a 1 in
our column values is 1,024,
and we will write that down.
The next number
where we have a 1 in
our column values is
512, we write that down.
The next number would be 64,
32, 16, and 1.
We would write all these numbers
down and then add them together.
That gives us a total of 601,713.
The starting cluster
for this file
would be cluster 601,713.
Here we're taking another
look at our high word.
There's our high word value, 9,
and there's our low
word value of 71 2E.
We convert them to little-Endian,
we break them apart,
we'd get our values just like
we did in the last slide,
and we can add those
values together,
and we come up with our 601,714.
Now, your tools are going
to do this for you,
and you can use the
Window's calculator
to convert these bytes also.
You'd be converting
them as a D word,
a double word, a 32-bit value.
The FAT file modification
date and time,
it is read little-Endian.
If you want to
manually decode it,
you would do it the
same as you did
for the file creation
date and time,
just convert it the same way.
Again, your tools will do
this for you and
you'll see that when
we do the walk-through with
Active Disk Editor at
the end of the module.
That file size is read
little-Endian, it's four bytes,
32-bit value, and it's
the file size in bytes,
is the size of the file in bytes.
The long file name
directory entry.
We're looking at a long
file name directory entry.
We're looking at a file
directory set right here,
but we're going to focus on
the long file name because we've
already talked about
the short file name.
But you can see the
DOS alias in slide,
and now we can see the
long file name entries.
The first byte of
a long file name entry is
called the sequence byte.
Now, the right nibble
is the sequence order.
The right nibble of that byte,
you can see we have 1, 2, 3,
and 4, that's the order that
this file name is read.
The left nibble is going to
indicate the last
entry in the set.
You can see we have a 01, 02,
a 03, and look,
we have a 44.
That 4 indicates the last
entry in the directory set.
It could have been 43 or 42,
depending on the
length of the file,
but the first nibble,
the right nibble
represents the order,
the left nibble indicates
the last entry.
We've talked about
the status byte
when we're talking about
the long file name.
The rest of the long
file name pretty
much only gives us
the name of the file.
There is a long file
name flag at offset 0B,
you'll see a value of 0F.
When you see that value
of 0F at offset 0B,
that tells you you're
looking at a long file name.
We can also see the
reserved byte is 00.
We saw a few slides back that,
that also indicates
a long file name.
That is how you can tell you're
looking at a long
file name entry.
Now we're going to do a
walk-through and take
a look with Active Disk
Editor at our root directory.
Please attach your MBR_VHD.
Once you attach it,
note the disk number
of your attached VHD,
so when we go to look for it,
we know what number
we're looking for.
I also want you to open
Active Disk Editor.
To start our walk-through,
the first thing we need
to do is attach our VHD.
Go to Actions, attach VHD,
navigate out to where
your VHD is saved,
and click "Open" to
attach your VHD.
Once your VHD is attached,
it should look like mine.
You should have an
extended partition on
there and you should
have six volumes.
Now, we're going to open
up Active Disk Editor.
Once Active Disk Editor opens,
we're going to
select "Open Disk",
now we want to look
at our volumes,
so we're going to select volumes.
Because we're looking
at a logical volume.
We're going to choose
our FAT 32 volume S,
I'm going to select it,
and we're going to click "Open".
We're immediately taken to
the volume boot record.
We covered the volume boot
record in our last module.
But there are some things
you need to look at in
a volume boot record
all the time.
What we want to see
is bytes per sector,
and make a notice
sectors per cluster.
We can see we have four
Our previous walk through
we had a FAT volume with
two sectors per cluster.
There can be variations
in how many sectors per
cluster you're looking at
especially with a FAT volume.
You want to check
that out and make
sure you know bytes per sector
and sectors per cluster.
Now, we're looking for
the root directory and
we can see the root cluster
is still cluster 2.
Cluster 2 is where we want to go.
We go ahead and click
on "Cluster 2",
we'll use our shortcut here,
where it says root cluster
here on the left-hand side,
we'll select cluster
2 and then take
in to our FAT 32 root directory.
We can see the first entry
is our volume label.
Right-click and set
template position.
We can see we have the filename,
our volume label
has no extension.
You're going to see these dots in
ASCII represented
as hexadecimal 20.
We do have an attribute byte.
We look at our attribute byte,
we're going to expand attribute
and we can see we're looking at
the volume attribute is
set that indicates to us
that this is a volume name.
We do see one date and
time which is a
modified date and time,
and it is 82,
2020 at 3:09 AM.
Now, remember these
are local times,
which means whatever time
it is on the computer,
it's going to be the same time
that's stored in our
directory entries.
It is possible that
somebody can set
their computer to a time
zone that they're not
in or maybe they
got a new computer and
never reset the time zone.
But this time recorded in
the root directory in FAT,
is going to be the time
from the system
it's operating on.
Now let's look down you see
we have a lot of entries.
We're going to take a
look at the entry, SHORT.
TXT. This is a short
filename entry.
This file is named SHORT TXT,
because you can see
in the entry above,
it's not related to
the century because it
starts with a hex E5,
which we're going to talk
about in future module,
but you can also see that
this is not a DOS alias.
There's no tilde here.
It's just the filename,
a space, and then the TXT.
If this were a DOS alias,
that'll be utility.
We'll see that when we look
at our next directory entry.
What we're going to do
is highlight the 53,
right-click, and "Set
template position".
Now we can look at our
short filename entry.
What's nice about this tool is it
does highlight it all for us,
and it does translate
all the data for us.
We looked at how
we would manually
translate the creation date and
time in the high
word, if we had one.
But the entry is going to
start with the file name,
followed by the file extension.
Then we have our attribute byte,
and we have a hexadecimal 2,0.
We can go ahead in
our template and look
at our attribute.
We can see this is
an archived file.
None of the other bytes are set,
just the archive bit.
Then we have that reserved byte.
We said that reserved byte will
indicate if it's a short filename
or a long filename entry.
Hexadecimal 1,0 indicates
short filename entry.
Now we have our
millisecond creation time.
This is a refinement of
10 milliseconds for the
creation date and time only.
This only relates to creation
time, not modified time.
1F would be a decimal 31.
Next, we have our
creation date and time.
We looked at this in our
slides and we learned how
to manually interpret that,
but you can see here that
the tool does
interpret it for us.
If we wanted to validate that,
we could break that out and
interpret it ourselves.
Now, the millisecond time,
if we were going to be adding it,
you would add it on
the end of the time.
You'd put a colon after the 50,
and add in the millisecond
time, which was 31.
So it'd be 5:50, 31 milliseconds.
Now we have our last access date,
and again we only have a date
with last access, no time.
The next two bytes are
going to be the high word.
We'd only have a high
word if we needed
more than two bytes
to address the starting
cluster of this file.
In this case, we don't.
Next, we have our
modified date and time.
Now we have our cluster lowered,
and because we did
not have a high word,
this is the actual starting
cluster of our file.
Our files are going to
start in cluster 10.
Now we have the file size.
These values all
read little-endian,
so 00, 0A, we know
that A would be 10.
A hexadecimal A would
be a decimal 10.
Again, this would be read
little-endian from left to right.
Our file size would be 127 bytes.
This value is giving us
our file size in bytes.
That's how we read and interpret
this short filename
directory entry.
Now, a long filename
We're going to choose
this new tilde 1TXT.
I can already tell this as
the DOS alias by the
tilde and ASCII.
The tilde is this little
squiggly sign right
here, that's the tilde.
Highlight the beginning
of the file entry,
right-click, "Set
template position".
This is, again, a
short filename entry.
If we look above it,
we do see the 0F.
The tilde tells us
that we're going to
have long filename entries above
this short filename
because it is a DOS alias.
It would be read exactly the same
way as any other
short filename entry.
We go above this, we see
the status byte for
the long filename.
The status bytes is 0,1.
This tells us the right
nibble is the sequence,
the left nibble will indicate
the last directory entry in
the set for that filename.
We see 0,1, so this
is the first entry,
but we're going to have
another one above it.
We look above it,
we do see a 4,2.
Two indicates it's the
second long filename entry,
and the four, the left nibble
indicates it's the last one
in this directory entry set.
We see we have the status byte.
Next to status byte,
we have the first five
characters of the filename.
In this case, it
would be new space
t. Space is count as a character.
We can see we have
our attribute byte 0F
indicates a long filename.
We also have our reserved,
which is 00 which also
indicates long filename.
There is a checksum
value in here.
That's for error checking.
Then we have characters 6
through 11 of the filename,
and then after that,
we're going to have
these two bytes that
are always going to be 00,
and then we have characters
12 and 13 of the filename.
It says new texts docu is
what we've got so far.
We go up to the next long
filename directory entry.
Remember, all these
entries are 32 bytes,
two lines of 16 in length.
They're 32 byte entries.
Right-click, set
template position.
It's actually showing us the
entire directory set here,
but we're going to read this one.
I'm going to right-click,
set template position,
and we're going to click
in the filename entry.
We can see our status byte is 42.
Four indicates the last
directory entry in the set,
so we know this is the last entry
for this particular file,
and two tells us
it's the second one,
so this file has two
long filename entries.
We can see we have
remaining characters
here of the long filename,
the next five characters
of the long filename.
In this particular case,
they are the last ones.
We also have our attribute byte
which for a long filename
will always be 0f.
Then we have the reserved
byte which is 00,
indicating a long filename.
Now, we have a
checksum byte again.
In here, we would have the
characters of the extension.
The next character is and
the filename 6 through 11.
In this case, it is our
file extension TXT.
Then these bytes
would always be 00,
and this would be
the next two characters
of the filename,
but it is FF, FF, FF,
FF because our filename
does not have any
further characters.
Once you come to the last
character in the filename,
they will pad the rest
of the entry with FF,
and that is how we read
the long filename
directory entries.
Now, going back to
the short filename,
it says our starting cluster,
there's no high word so our
lowered cluster says nine.
Let's just take a look
and navigate there,
so we're going to go to
sector and we're going
to write this in
hex because this tool
likes to navigate in hex.
We're going to say 0x to
indicate we're in hex 09.
We're going to write 0x09,
we're going to cluster 09.
I'm going to say okay,
and we get out there.
We can see there is a
small text document
here and we can see what it says.
This is a new file document,
and we're going to look at
directory entries, which
is what we're doing.
We verified that it's out there.
We could verify the
size in bytes also.
That is how we would read
our root directory entries.
Your file system will stop
reading when it comes to the 00.
So if there was any
data written in here,
it wouldn't see it
past the 00 entry.